So let's explore what we learned about closures and functions in more detail
and for this let's create a new function,
again it doesn't really matter how you create it but I'll use the function declaration here and I will
name this function greet user
and in there, I want to console log Hi
and then some user name variable.
This doesn't exist yet but I'll create it out here, I'll set user name equal to Max or to whatever you
want and this should also be user name with a capital N then.
So if I call this function now, what would you expect to see in the console?
Well you would probably expect to see Hi Max
and if we reload, indeed that is what we see. Now that should be straightforward,
we have user name here and we reference it from inside the function as you learned,
you can reach out to variables or constants that are created outside of the function or as we just learned
it, this function has its own lexical environment
and in that functions environment, we basically have nothing,
the only thing we actually have in there is a pointer at the outer lexical environment and there, we
have a user name variable
and since we do have access to the surrounding environments, we can access user name from inside of the
function,
that's not too new.
Now what would you expect to see in the console if I change the user name to Manuel here?
I change it after the function was created, at the point of time it is created user name is Max
but before I call it. What would you expect to see in a console now?
Hi Max or Hi Manuel?
Well let's give it a try.
We see Hi Manuel and again that is basically something I explained before as well.
We got our user name here and it is in the environment outside of the function, it's not part of the
functions own environment and therefore the function does close over this
and would store username
but as I said if that variable then changes, the function reflects that change.
So it does not copy the value here when it is created and log that in,
it just logs in the variable itself
you could say, access to the variable
you could say, not the value of the variable. Hence when you call the function,
indeed then it gets the latest value
it can find for that variable and that is the value we set here.
Now let's get a bit more tricky,
what if I add a name variable here inside of that function and I basically store whatever is in user
name in the name and then I add name here?
So I still reference user name here but I store it in a new variable and then I use that internal variable
here, now name is part of the environment of the function,
so of the lexical environment of the function itself, it however points or it refers to user name which
is part of the outer lexical environment, what would you expect now?
Hi Manuel or Hi Max? Let's give it a try,
we again see Hi Manuel
and the reason for it is the same as before, we do refer to that user name variable inside of our
function
but when the function executes, it reaches out to that surrounding lexical environment to which it holds
a pointer, so to which the functional the pointer and gets the latest value from there, which is why we
see this.
Now what do you think happens if I create a new variable in here where I store Anna inside of the create
user function and thereafter I create that same variable where I store Maximilian outside of the create
user function? So I have the same variable here, same variable name in the inner function and in the outer
function,
what do you expect to get now?
Hi Anna or Hi Maximilian?
Well let's reload,
we see
Hi Anna
and that shouldn't come as a surprise because name here is created as a variable inside of the function.
Now you also learned earlier that you can have a function with the same name outside and inside of
the function,
this is a concept called shadowing, the inner function, the inner environment you would say wins over
the outer environment.
So this function has its own lexical environment and there it adds a name variable,
it also adds a pointer at the outer lexical environment and there, it also at the time it runs will have
a name variable
but and that's really important, when the function executes, it first of course checks its inner environment
and only if it doesn't find a variable there, then it goes to the next level, to the outer environment,
so the environment of a surrounding function or the global environment and then it checks that outer
environment for that variable of that name
but here we do have that variable inside of the function
so there's no need to go to the outer one and look for this name
and that's what we see Hi Anna. Things of course would be different if I would comment out the name
declaration inside of that function.
Now I still refer to a name variable which wasn't even declared when the function was created but which
was declared before the function was called and therefore here if I reload, we indeed see Hi Maximilian
because now we can't find the name variable on the inner lexical environment and therefore we have to
reach out to the next one in line which in this case is the global lexical environment
and there, we find that name.
So these are functions and closures with this scope environment thing.
Now it's not brand new, you learned about scope before and scope, what I called scope there basically
is this lexical environment thing,
scope is all about having different scopes for functions, for if blocks, for for loops and so on,
so for everything with curly braces as you learned and in the end, that scope is just about creating
such a lexical environment for these curly braces and therefore it's not just functions or the global
scope which in the end yield that lexical environment, a for loop has its own scope or lexical environment
and the same is true for an if statement.
So you can also use these terms interchangeably here,
the important thing to remember is how functions
and by the way also if statements and so on are able to access outer environments and refer to them
and the special thing about functions just is that they log in the surrounding environment and its
variables so that they can remember it and use it when the function eventually gets called even if that
logged in variable wasn't used outside of the function before
so that Javascript does not dispose of these unused variables but keeps them so that the function that
might be interested still can use that, this is how you can think about that
and that's the important thing about understanding closures. Functions
remember the surrounding variables
you could say.